---
title: The subconscious crapshoot
date: 11/09/2012

This is an idea that has been floating around my mind for years - I call it the subconscious crapshoot. 

You know how people like to say "oh, he won the genetic lottery"? It's the idea that all the variations of genes magically produced a winning combination that makes you great at sports, art, music, or whatever.

I think there's something missing from the picture - our subconscious habits and patterns. Think about this: ever since we were little, we learned things by focusing on the results. You see your parents hold a cup and you mimic it, and as long as you can hold the cup with the same firmness, speed, and agility, then all is okay. This process happens everywhere, from walking to speaking, to running... Go into an elementary school and you'll see every kid writing in different postures. But hey, as long as the letters look the same, its all good right?

Well, you might say that these activities are not competitive and do not exert enough forces to encourage people to find the most efficient solution. You are right. However, look at professional piano players, they may have similar hand techniques but beyond that, they seem to go out of their way to contort their bodies in response to the music, and they do so in ways different from each other. 

The way we learn things is almost like the way we teach machines to learn. Focus on the results and filter out all the variations and patterns that doesn't work. The problem is that unlike machines, we do not methodologically go through every permutation. We settle on the first one that works well enough.

As years go by, subconscious patterns build upon one another. From your ability to make letters, comes your ability to draw. You learn to sit and the sitting postures influence the way you type on the computer. How you learned to hold a spoon might later on grow into the feeling you get on what is natural when holding a phone, a mouse, or even a surgical knife.

The more these patterns build upon one another, the more complex activities we can do. Until eventually we reach the point where many of our skills have more resemblance to little miracles than their humble beginnings. Humans become capable to achieve amazing feats without the least bit of understanding of all the processes that automatically happen. We just will it, and it works. 

Just like magic.

>Any science sufficiently advanced will appear like magic to the outsider. 

The same can be said for learning. When enough patterns build upon each other, it becomes miraculous...until the day it stops working. 

As a society, we tend to ignore the failures, the rejects, the abnormals. Their existence is classified as outliers, or perhaps simply mental problems or disabilities. But I think it also shows how big the blackbox is that resides in each of us. One day, it might come to pass that an accident leaves you unable to access what enabled you to write. How would you ever know how to rebuild the skill that you lost?

The bigger problem, I think, is one of potential. If our blackboxes are full of processes that was originally chosen based on what worked __first__ instead of what works __best__, then think of all the potential that is going to waste. If you could somehow optimize it, borrow patterns from other people that works better than your own, imagine your potential.

This is why I call it the subconscious crapshoot. It's pretty random which variation of 'picking up a pencil' you got, or which 'stand on your toes' did you figure out. One day, when you've built your towers of skill, and reached the heights of your writing ability or basketball potential, this little pattern might be what's holding you back from greatness. What if you could change....? 