---
title: On being proven wrong
date: 10/09/2012

Today it happened.

But let's rewind back a few years and start the story there. It was 2008 and I just came back from China. Every week my dad goes to a singing teacher and learns Opera. Being home with nothing serious to do until the start of the new school year, my father decided it was a good time for me to join him.

My teacher's name is Dawn; she is kind, and encouraging, and wonderful, and marvelous, and, and, and... Dawn believes that good singing is about having good support and good vocal position.

> Support - the control of the breath using the diaphram and the abdominal muscles. 

> Vocal position - control of muscles in your mouth.

Since then, and over the next 3 years, I heard these two ideas in every single lesson, with every teacher. It is ingrained in the pedagogy of everyone I met in the opera singing world. Ask someone what they think of singing technique and you will get a variation of the above.

Problem was, I __did not__ get it. This way of learning seemed not only foreign to me but it also seemed completely wrong. I heard things like "oh, do that but think more forward," or, "don't push up, feel the support compressing." When it really got wild, you hear things like "imagine the sound coming out of the front of your forehead like a unicorn horn, resonnating in a large cathedral."

It was a blackbox to me. Or maybe it was more like a map to nowhere - all these instructions and visualizations meant nothing. How can a picture inside my mind help me move the muscles of my body? Unicorn magic, it aint.

I only started improving earnstly when I abandoned these teachings. I began to look for my own paths, do my own experiments, make my own theory by cherry-picking ideas from other fields. But all the while, I had a nagging thought in mind, a large doubt, a shadow over my newfound progress.

How can everyone be wrong? A conspiracy theory involving these kind and lovely ladies is less likely than pigs pretending to not be able to fly. More realistically, these ideas come from people who really *are* good at singing - a category that I was certainly not a member of. So it is only logical to think that I must have overlooked something, or perhaps I was, at least in part, wrong.

This brings me back to what happened today. While I was singing, I experienced something that really resembles what my teachers was describing and I am a better singer because of it. But does this mean that, today, I proved myself wrong?

It is a strange feeling, having foresaw this possibility since three years ago, seeing it come true and experienacing an "I told you so" from my past self. Was I simply stubborn for three years refusing to see the light? Or perhaps I am a glutton for punishment, and would only do things the hard way? Probably a little bit of both. But dear past self, I am really glad you took this harder path. 

I think the lesson I learned is that often teaching is less about learning and more about filtering. Had I actually tried to keep doing it the *proper* way, I probably would have failed. The techniques and descriptions only seem to work for people who shared the same foundation - who intuitively already knew *how* to sing but only needed to practice doing it consistently. I did not know *how* to sing, or you could say that my foundation was flawed. I spent three years trying to get to even ground, and if I did not do it my way, I would have been filtered out - a casualty for the sake of art.

What is it the enables us to easily learn something? Hidden from even our own thoughts, we have habits and abilities collected since birth. These are the blackboxes within each of us, when they work, they enables us to fit in and become great. But when they fail, it leaves us without any knowledge of how to proceed. 

I have a new doubt now, and its casting a shadow on the skills I excel at. I am uncertain how much learning I actual have, and how much of it was only practical knowledge built upon invisible foundations. Thankfully, the thought of this makes me happy, because it means there is so much more to learn :)






